---
title: "A promiscuous mechanism to phase separate eukaryotic carbon fixation in the green lineage"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2024-04-11-cslinker
date: 2024-04-11
venue: 'bioRxiv'
paperurl: 'https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.04.09.588658v1'
citation: 'Barrett, J. et al. (2024). &quot;A promiscuous mechanism to phase separate eukaryotic carbon fixation in the green lineage.&quot; <i>bioRxiv.</i> (2024)'
---

**Abstract**<br>
CO<sub>2</sub> fixation is commonly limited by inefficiency of the CO<sub>2</sub>-fixing enzyme Rubisco. Eukaryotic algae concentrate and fix CO<sub>2</sub> in phase-separated condensates called pyrenoids, which complete up to one-third of global CO<sub>2</sub> fixation. Condensation of Rubisco in pyrenoids is dependent on interaction with disordered linker proteins that show little conservation between species. We developed a sequence-independent bioinformatic pipeline to identify linker proteins in green algae. We report the linker from <i>Chlorella</i> and demonstrate that it binds a conserved site on the Rubisco large subunit. We show the <i>Chlorella</i> linker phase separates <i>Chlamydomonas</i> Rubisco and that despite their separation by ∼800 million years of evolution, the Chlorella linker can support the formation of a functional pyrenoid in <i>Chlamydomonas</i>. This cross-species reactivity extends to plants, with the <i>Chlorella</i> linker able to drive condensation of some native plant Rubiscos in vitro and in planta. Our results represent an exciting frontier for pyrenoid engineering in plants, which is modelled to increase crop yields.<br><br>
**Description**<br>
Since the discovery of the protein EPYC1, which is the molecular glue of the <i>Chlamydomonas</i> pyrenoid, in 2016 by <a href="https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1522866113">Mackinder *et al.*</a>, it was conceived that similar mechanisms to phase separate carbon fixation in pyrenoids must exist elsewhere. Considerable weight was granted to this hypothesis in 2023 when Zhen Guo Oh, Warren Ang and colleagues in Oliver Mueller-Cajar's lab at NTU <a href="https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2304833120">discovered an analagous protein, PYCO1,</a>  in the red algal diatom <i>Phaeodactylum tricornutum</i>. The hypothesis that there are EPYC1 and PYCO1 analogues in other pyrenoids was the motivating factor to build a bioinformatic tool to aid in the identification of candidate proteins. The Fast Linker Identification Pipeline for Pyrenoids (<a href="https://github.com/james-r-barrett/FLIPPer">FLIPPer</a>) developed in this study works on the basis of identifying proteins with properties essential to the function of EPYC1 and PYCO1, in a sequence-independent manner. FLIPPer filters for proteins that have low sequence complexity, contain structural elements consistent with those of EPYC1/PYCO1, identifies tandem repeats using  <a href="https://amnewmanlab.stanford.edu/xstream/">XSTREAM</a>, and filters for disorder using <a href="https://metapredict.net/">metapredict</a>. This approach achieves high selectivity (~0.1% of input sequences) across genomes, and allows for more intensive characterisations of the candidate sequences.<br><br>
In this study, we used FLIPPer to identify the pyrenoid linker protein in the green alga <i>Chlorella sorokiniana</i>. We were intererested in *Chlorella*, as despite their highly similar cellular and pyrenoid appearances, <i>Chlorella</i> and <i>Chlamydomonas</i> diverged ~800 million years ago. The linker protein from *Chlorella* bears little sequence homology to that of *Chlamydomonas* (EPYC1) nor _Phaeodactylum_ (PYCO1), suggesting they are of independent origin. In line with this, a structural characterisation of the binding site of the _Chlorella_ linker to Rubisco indicated a novel binding interface. Excitingly, the _Chlorella_ linker was found to utilise the large subunit of Rubisco to underpin its function in cross-linking Rubiscos in the pyrenoid matrix. In contrast to the small subunit binding site of EPYC1, the _Chlorella_ binding site is highly conserved across the green lineage, owing to its plastid encoding. In this study we demonstrate that the conservation of this binding site permits a level of promiscuity to the *Chlorella* linker, allowing it to cross-link and phase separate non-cognate Rubiscos. This behaviour extends to Solanaceae plant Rubiscos, providing an exciting prospect fast-tracking engineering of pyrenoid machinery in important crop plants (Tomato, Potato, Pepper *etc.*).